A Comparison of Standard (ART) versus Restorative Reproductive Medicine (RRM)
===

IIRRM Host: [00:00:00] All right. And thank you everyone for joining. Really looking forward to hearing this talk. Dr. Naomi Whittaker is an OBGYN fertility surgeon focused on women's restorative reproductive medicine, compassionate health care, and education. Dr. Whittaker is a board certified OBGYN and a fellowship trained surgeon who specializes in the Creighton Model Fertility Care System and NaProTechnology, which works cooperatively with a woman's body to treat the underlying causes of gynecologic disorders.

IIRRM Host: issues and infertility, such as endometriosis and PCOS. She helps women improve their gynecologic health and avoid or achieve pregnancy in accordance with their natural fertility using the latest research, medicine, and surgery. Dr. Whittaker earned her medical degree at Creighton University School of Medicine and completed her residency in OBGYN at O'Hare University.

IIRRM Host: OSF Hospital in Peoria, Illinois, followed by a fellowship in medical and surgical NaProTechnology at the Pope Paul VI Institute in Omaha, Nebraska. Dr. Whittaker is [00:01:00] currently practicing at Penn State Holy Spirit Hospital in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. And again, we really look forward to hearing the upcoming lecture.

IIRRM Host: So thank you very much, Dr. Whittaker, for joining and presenting for us today. 

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It is an honor to be here among some of the best medical professionals and researchers. around the world advocating for women's health. So thank you so much for having me. Okay, go ahead and begin. I have many slides. I'll try to get through as quickly as possible, and if we need to go back at the Q&amp; A, we can do that and focus on these slides.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The title of my lecture is a comparison of standard assisted reproductive technology versus restorative reproductive medicine. I have no conflicts of interest to report. The goals are to understand. The standard REI medical approach to infertility diagnosis and treatment, understand the risks, success rates to decide for yourself, whether IVF and IOI are evidence based, be able to compare and contrast REI with restorative [00:02:00] reproductive medicine, to empathize with patients experience, and be able to counsel them thoroughly on risks, benefits, and alternatives to both approaches.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: My background, I was born after IVF was invented, and I always believed that IVF was a normal, necessary means to a good end. I went to Creighton University Medical School, which introduced me to NaProTechnology and inspired me to enter women's health. In my residency, I did have four years of train of lectures every other week by an IVF physician and spent a couple months rotating with him in his clinics and surgeries.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I completed my NaProTechnology Medical and Surgical Fellowship in 2018 with Dr. Hilgers in Omaha. I've had experience getting patients who failed REI treatments reviewing their records at our high volume NaPro referral center in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. I also have an interest in following IVF statistics, social media, news podcasts, such as Venus Rising, where I was able to be interviewed there.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: My husband and I have spent some [00:03:00] time creating NaProEbook. com, BuysFruit. org, and I also have an Instagram account to try to help spread awareness of restorative medicine. So the basics of IVF and overview. One million babies have been born in the United States between 87 and 2015 through IVF. The success rate is about 21 percent for women younger than 35 of having a full term normal birth weight singleton per cycle.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The average cost of a single IVF cycle in the U. S. is between 10, 000 to 15, 000. Now the history of IVF. In the 19 sorry, in the 17 hundreds, the first child was born from artificial insemination, which I find absolutely fascinating. IUI has been done basically since the 17 hundreds. In the 1930s there was another milestone where when Stein and Leventhal discovered PCOS, incidentally the ovarian wedge resection when they were biopsying an ovary and ended up doing the first [00:04:00] ovarian wedge resection.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The next milestone was the CLOMID approval by the FDA in 1967 where they thought that would be the next turning point in the infertility field. Concertive laparoscopy gained popularity in the 1970s, as well as REI became recognized fellowship by ABOG in 1972, and the first test tube baby was born via IVF.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: In the 70s. In the 90s, ICSI, Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection was created. To get background about where we are now in medicine, it's good to see an overview of OBGYN training. So General OBGYN Residency Training offers comprehensive general obstetric and gynecologic care. It does provide excellent training to help keep patients alive in obstetric and gynecologic emergencies, cancer prevention and treatment.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: They provide extensive birth control training and extensive treatment on training, surgical training of hysterectomy. The limitations of this training, [00:05:00] there are, there is a minimal focus on fertility treatments, adhesion prevention in surgery and endometriosis proper treatment. This is a slide of the ACGME residency requirement numbers.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: This is the minimum number to graduate residency. As a resident, you need to have this minimum number and do most of the work, over 50 percent of the work to count this towards your total. You record it and submit it at the end of your training. And so you can see the focus of the training by the numbers.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Obstetrics is emphasized in the numbers, as you can see, also hysterectomy. Those are the majority of the numbers focused in general OB GYN training. And there's a lot to learn in the four years of OB GYN training as well. This here slide talks about a This is an article by Cleveland Clinic.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Talks about reproductive endocrinology and infertility fellows want more surgical training. And they say that reproductive surgery [00:06:00] may be a more cost effective treatment option than IVF. And that many REIs do not offer corrective, Reproductive surgery to their patients because they lack adequate training to perform such procedures.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: 45 percent of trainees said that they wanted additional surgical training during their fellowship. Not all REI fellowship programs have faculty that can teach surgery, and instead they refer to general gynecologists or MIGS trained surgeons, so minimally invasive gynecologic surgeons, and I'll go over their training briefly, requirements.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I find that quite interesting that they refer back to general gynecologists who have not performed a fertility felt, been trained in a fertility fellowship. And they do admit that someone who's been specifically trained to do reproductive surgery is best to perform fertility preserving and enhancing surgery.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Here are the subspecialty volume guidelines for reproductive endocrinology and infertility fellows. You can see they have no [00:07:00] minimum requirement for endometriosis or tubal surgery. They have a heavy emphasis on IVF retrievals and IUIs.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: When I compare this to my numbers in my NaPro fellowship surgical training I had 114 laparoscopies, 58 being robotic, 54 endometriosis surgeries ovarian wedge resection surgery, training and additional fertility specific surgeries, such as isthmus seal and selective hystereosalpingogram, as well as tubal anastomosis and rhinectomy.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I would like to contrast this to the minimally invasive gynecologic surgeon training MIGS. Fellowship training is fantastic for complicated disease, complicated endometriosis, deep infiltrative endometriosis, complex hysterectomies. The disadvantage to this training is there is no or minimal directly fertility focused training [00:08:00] or procedures except listed here, except perhaps a septum resection on hysteroscopy.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It does not appear that they have minimum hysterosalpingogram or selective HSG training, tubal surgery or ovarian wedge resection training. And you can see a and emphasis on hysterectomy training. So their main focus in general is pain and cure treating pain surgically though some do some kind of sub specialize in fertility, but that's, it's not very standard or necessarily a focus of many fellowship programs.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And of note, I did emphasize here retroperitoneal dissection. This is a, advantage in a way, but also a disadvantage for fertility surgery. It's important to be careful to do much retroperitoneal dissection as this can cause severe scarring and infertility worsening infertility due to this.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It's definitely advantageous in certain deep infiltrative endometriosis surgeries and [00:09:00] cancer surgeries but I do think In some cases, it may be overused. There appears to be a void that the NaPro surgical approach and training fulfills. For example, the selective hysterosalpingogram with the ability to canalize blocked tubes is a big part of the training, and I personally have seen this work.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Tremendously, I think it's one of the simplest and most effective high yield treatments that I have to offer to my patients. Dr. Hilgers and Dr. Young published a study in fertility and sterility titled, Intratubal Pressure Before and After Transurfocal Catheterization. of the fallopian tubes, and they just describe the selective hysterosalpingogram procedure, which is fantastic.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Instead of doing a regular HSG, which you just inject dye through the cervix with an acorn manipulator, you actually put a catheter in, up into the tubal ostea, And use a live x ray, inject dye [00:10:00] into each fallopian tube, measure their resistance, so we can identify even a partial tubal occlusion which can be clinically significant, and improve that partial occlusion or complete occlusion, most of the time with cannulization.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It's highly successful. So let's go back to the standard protocol for infertility that most patients go through. So I had a hard time finding a good diagram, but I thought this one was pretty good. You can see the roadmap in general. Patients may go through. And as you can see, it appears that all roads lead to IVF, eventually.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The ACOG Committee Opinion, co authored with ASRM, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, talks about the infertility workup for the women's health specialists. They say that infertility tests that should not be routinely ordered include laparoscopy for unexplained infertility [00:11:00] and a prolactin level.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I do find that interesting that they clearly say that should not be routinely ordered.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: What they do recommend is a history and physical AMH transvaginal ultrasound, serum progesterone measurement in the gluteal phase, HSG or histro sonography And perhaps a HSG, Hysteroscopy, InferMEN, and SF, Seminal Fluid Analysis, and History.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And I referenced the Spirov REI textbook and was able to get some quotes from this book to help explain the thoughts behind the treatments and some of the education that they're giving to their fellows.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And they wrote in the textbook, The scope and sequence of modern infertility evaluations have shifted from always making a specific diagnosis to using the most efficient and cost effective tests. So it's shifted from systemic correction of each identified factor and instead applied most efficient and cost effective [00:12:00] therapy, which often is assisted reproductive technology or IUI and IVF.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: They assume that women with regular menses are almost always ovulatory. Women with regular or infrequent menses do not have to go through any diagnostic tests because it's obvious that they're not ovulating. is what Spirov states. There is no clear consensus on alluvial phase progesterone on what is normal.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I've seen here they say less than three is abnormal, and maybe greater than ten is optimal,

Naomi Whittaker, MD: but that there's no way to qualify a luteal phase issue. And they don't really address luteal phase defects how to diagnose or treat, or even if they exist, other than does a woman ovulate and does she produce a progesterone or not? And they also do not clearly say when to test.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Typically when I see patients, it is a cycle day one [00:13:00] progesterone that is drawn.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The Spirov textbook also states that cervical mucus rarely, if ever, is the sole or principal cause of infertility. They do not recommend a post coital And unless someone has had chronic cervicitis or stenosis from like a cone procedure, the likelihood that cervical mucus represents an important obstacle is remote.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: In addition, they believe that even if there was a cervical factor, that wouldn't matter because all the contemporary treatments they state for unexplained infertility include IUI, IVF, and both of which go around cervical factor. And they also state IVF has become the treatment of choice for much or most tubal factor for infertility.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: However, they do say that surgery remains an appropriate option in select circumstances for couples with ethical or religious [00:14:00] objections, or financial restrictions and that the success rate is quite high for people who go through microsurgical sterilization reversal, and it's 45 percent to 82%.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Unfortunately, I don't know how they would do this if it's not part of the training, but. All right, and this is the article demonstrating the, that tubal anastomosis is very effective and has a significantly higher cumulative pregnancy rate than IVF, is more cost efficient, and especially in women age 40 and over, where IVF is especially has low success.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I found this interesting, the definition of unexplained infertility in Spirov it implies a normal semen analysis operatory function in uterine cavity at least unilateral tubal patency. So then if all their tests are negative they assume this is due to abnormalities in gametes or implantation and there's just no test.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: for it. And so that they clearly, [00:15:00] there's just no test and it's just completely unknown. So all treatments for unexplained infertility are empiric. The basic strategy is the same for all to bring the more than usual numbers of oocytes and sperm in the right place at the right time. So again, all roads lead to IVF or IUI, ovarian stimulation with IUI or IVF.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: There was a review in the book of eight studies analyzing 932 treatment cycles. The estimated cycle of fecundability was 5. 6 percent with Clomiphene and 8. 3 percent with Clomiphene and IUI. The results were not statistically significant. They still put in a number needed to treat, even though it was not statistically significant, which I found interesting.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: As for IUI, in Spirov they quoted that in a study, Clomid or Electrozole with IUI versus expectant management was significant. Statistically significant with a 31 percent live birth rate versus 9 [00:16:00] percent live birth rate. The number needed to treat is 5. And for each of these 5 women, they included 3 cycles per woman.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So 1 live birth per 15 IOI cycles. And again, this is Clomid and Letrozole combined with IOI versus nothing. And of note, gonadotropins do not improve outcomes and success compared to Clomid with IOI. The best available evidence suggests that treatment with IOI in natural cycles has no clinically important effects.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: In summary, The data does not demonstrate that IOI is the main factor in improving treatment success. Instead, it appears that medication is the benefit versus expectant management, not IOI itself. The data does not suggest that IOI is any better than timed intercourse. There's no clear scientific explanation for the mechanism of IOI to be of benefit other than timing.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: In fact, the process of centrifugation Using the centrifuge with the sperm causes reactive oxygen species. So I do wonder if it actually [00:17:00] can impair sperm function. I'll add more data to follow. As far as IVF in Spirov, the Dutch trial of 116 women of IVF, stimulated IOI, IVF, sorry versus stimulated IOI, they actually surprisingly had similar pregnancy rates, 24 percent versus 21%.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: An additional Dutch trial of 602 women demonstrated three cycles of IVF with a live birth rate of 52%, six cycles of natural cycle IVF, 43%, six cycles of stimulated IOI, 47%. And so they had similar results. Same thing with the British trial of 207 women. One cycle of IVF, live birth rate was 33. 9%, and three cycles of ovarian stimulation, IUI, was 28.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: 7. The data here is showing not any stark difference between IUI and IVF. They both have similar pregnancy rates. Yet, in the textbook, they conclude, IVF is clearly the most effective treatment option for couples with unexplained infertility, regardless whether it is the first or last treatment.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: [00:18:00] This is a simplified algorithm of what I typically see when patients have gotten a workup elsewhere before they come to me, or if they've gone through IVF. For example, or just any REI clinic, they typically are told to try to conceive for 12 months. If they're younger than 35, if they're greater than 35, then they allow them to just try for six months before they get a workup.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: They'll typically do a history, try some ovulation induction, so just clone at 50 milligrams per day or 100, quite high doses. They may do an HSG and a seminal fluid analysis. and sometimes a few hormone labs as well, such as an AMH. The next step is typically recommending IOI with ovulation induction plus or minus a trigger times three rounds or so and then if they fail that to progress to IVF.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: plus or minus 60. So our IOI and IVF evidence based. Let's go into more success rates based on the Cochrane Review. This data is from [00:19:00] 15 trials of 2, 000 women. It is uncertain whether treatment with IOI in a natural cycle improves the life birth rate compared to treatment with expected management in a natural cycle with low quality evidence.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: That was based on 15 trials. This is data from 8 randomized parallel group trials of 1600 women. IVF may be associated with higher live birth rate than expected management, again doing nothing, but there is insufficient data to draw firm conclusions. that, again, IVF is better than expectant management.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Based on 10 randomized controlled trials of 757 couples, in comparison of IOI plus ovarian hyperstimulation versus timed intercourse and natural cycles, there's no evidence in difference of live birth rates.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: As far as pre implantation genetic testing, There were 13 trials of 2700 women. Insufficient evidence to show difference in live birth rates with pre implantation genetic testing. So this is when they test the embryo for aneuploidies [00:20:00] before they implant into the uterus. The current available evidence is insufficient to support pre implantation genetic testing and routine, clean, excuse me, routine clinical practice.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So this is an add on that does cost more. Than a regular IVF procedure. And I'm not sure if you're familiar with the USA SART course database but it's, it is a great database to look into or refer your patients to and understand yourself. And so I'm going to go through just briefly some of the data.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: In 2011, 36 percent of all fresh non donor ART cycles resulted in pregnancy and 29 percent in live birth, but not necessarily as a singleton term birth. So that includes preterm, very preterm it could include like a 23 weeker that does end up passing. That's just a live birth. So the 2015 National Summary Report, so it's printed, it's published by the CDC, but it's under the SART course.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: specialty under the CDC. So they receive all the data reported from all the [00:21:00] clinics in the United States. And so I find the 2015 report is the most interesting out of all the recent reports as how detailed their reporting is and how they report it. And this is the 2015 database live birth rate side per cycle.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So in this one, you can see In the red box, age less than 35, you can see 21 percent of women can have a term, normal weight, and singleton live birth. So assuming most of those are going to be, healthy birth. If you go To the right, as the age goes up, of course, the success per cycle goes down 17%, 11, age 41 to 42 is quite low, 5.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: 7%, 43 to 44 is 2. 3%.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Overall success rate total live births per total treatment cycles was 26. 2 percent for all cycles, all ages. This figure shows the [00:22:00] percentage of clinical pregnancies per transfer. It total transfers 29. 3%. And to the right, if you break that down, total live births is 81%. And you can see the breakdown of those pregnancies.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Again, total live births could mean a 24 25 weeker who later passes away, but is born alive.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: This table is interesting. To me, you can see each step of the process and how their rates go down with each step. So out of 93 retrieved and aged less than 35 they may transfer 71. Of those 71, embryos 38 will turn, will become considered a pregnancy with implantation and ongoing pregnancy, and of those 33 out of those 38 will go on for a live birth.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: This is similar data broken down in a different way. Total cycles you can see on the top line, followed by infants [00:23:00] born, and each year followed by live birth.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The 2018 SARTCORS report is not quite as helpful. They changed their data and they really limited what they reported. They didn't report as many tables like the 2015 and they changed the report to outcomes per retrieval instead of per transfer. And so they retrieve, 20, let's say, in a young woman, they may retrieve 20 eggs.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And transfer per cycle, transfer create maybe. 13 healthy embryos and transfer one embryo per cycle. So this is all based on that one retrieval. So they may have multiple IVF cycles where they transfer the embryo into the uterus. And so they, in this way, the statistics look better.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So less than 35 has a 52%. chance of having a pregnancy and a live birth, excuse me. So that [00:24:00] does look better, but that is the complete outcome not just per transfer, but you could see it maybe out of a whole treatment process, what you would expect the success rate to be in the end after multiple treatment cycles.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And below it says the number of atten intended retrievals per live birth. So about 1.9 retrievals per live birth for young women. I also like to look at the UK equivalent of the CDC database in the us. 'cause they do report a little different data. It's just interesting to see. In 2010 30% in the UK received a diagnosis of unexplained infertility.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And in 2009, the multiple birth rate. in the UK was up to 25 percent of ART cycles.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The multiple birth rate in 2017 and 2018 in ART cycles was down to 10%. There was a big push for single embryo transfer between those two studies, so I do think that did help with the multiple pregnancy rate. [00:25:00] This table from the UK Demonstrates the best chance of IVF success is the first embryo transfer, of course, when the patient is younger, and it does show an inverse relationship of the patient age and treatment cycle number.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So the success drops to less than 20 percent after treatment cycle number 3 and age 36.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So in summary, the financial cost is guaranteed to be high. The result of successful pregnancy is far from guaranteed. What other costs and risks are involved for the couple, society, and offspring? So some patient stories here. So patients definitely go to social media. Who are experiencing infertility.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Instagram is a big one that I'm familiar with. And this is a influencer account. Fab Fertility, and she was very public about her personal journey with IVF and here it demonstrates she had 26 embryo eggs retrieved and 19 embryos fertilized. She had one blastocyst on cycle day 5 and 9 on cycle day [00:26:00] 6.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And she has a picture of her end baby, which is also another phenomenon. This girl did have a successful live birth.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And and babies are big on social media women get attached to their embryos and you can see women posing with their embryos here and do get quite attached to them and frame them and you can see on the right announcing how the IVF cycle is unsuccessful. In the middle, it's they described it as their first family picture.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And after experiencing infertility and then undergoing IVF, some women have additional in any infertility story there is added heartbreak. I do believe so, more so for IVF patients. And this is a not uncommon scenario where this lady did get quadruplets and did deliver them pre viable.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And in my medical training we took care of multiple moms with this scenario as a threat, or it did happen. And they did deliver pre viable. And so I can't imagine going through the heartbreak of [00:27:00] infertility and, and having hope of four and then losing all of them. Of course, there are many ethical, financial, and medical issues.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I won't be able to go into all of them, but I'm going to try to just gloss over them. There are many public stories of couples fighting over embryos, for example. A recent one was the Sofia Vergara and her battle with her ex husband over embryos that he wanted to use into another surrogate after their divorce.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: He has two little girl embryos that he became attached to and did name and he talks in an op ed in the New York Times about his story. And in the past, when he dated, when in his 20s, his girlfriend did a termination, he felt like he had no say in that outcome and that the same thing was happening again to these embryos.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So many issues, legally, of what to do with embryos. This is just one of many examples. [00:28:00] And another big issue includes egg donors and surrogates. It is interesting to compare this to organ donation, as organ donation is a highly regulated process. However, if you contrast that to egg donors or surrogates, there's limited to no oversight for these women, or data available to them to evaluate risks.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It is highly lucrative for clinics. They have the payer's interest and not the donor's interest in mind. And these are often low income women who have limited access to legal aid, minimal education, and can be left with medical bills. For example, the egg donors are not considered part of the practice.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So they are not often responsible for complications after an egg donation. On to the IVF complications. Immediate risks of the procedure of IVF. include, but are not limited to, ectopic pregnancy, thromboembolism, ovarian hypersimulation syndrome. This is especially common in women with [00:29:00] PCOS.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Cleveland Clinic estimates that to be around 5 percent to 10%. Currently, it's better than it used to be, and 1 percent of the time it can be life threatening. And so you can see on the right on that picture, they tried to harvest as many eggs as possible. In a natural cycle you typically have one, perhaps two eggs, but they, the more the better.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So 20 plus eggs would be great under IVF circumstances to get as many eggs to hopefully help, create Healthy embryo.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Risks of pregnancy with IVF. So all complications of pregnancy are increased with IVF, including preeclampsia, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, multiple gestation, preterm birth, preterm labor, c section, placental abnormalities, ectopic pregnancy, small fetal gestational age, birth defects, perinatal mortality, low birth rate, as per the ACOG committee opinion.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: ACOG does lump in together clinical pregnancies from ovarian stimulation like ovulation medications [00:30:00] and IVF. In some cases, they lump them together to say that just infertility is a risk factor for these issues. They also state that data does suggest that ART further increases these risks. And specifically monozygotic twinning, which increases IEGR and twin to twin transfusion syndrome.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And in my training, whenever we had an IVF patient come in, we automatically, um, knew to be more alert for any of these complications. So it's a well known fact in OBGYN training that these are associated with IVF pregnancies. They go on to say that when a triplet or more pregnancy is encountered, the option of multi fetal reduction should be discussed.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: They also have a whole practice bulletin on that. Termination is part of IVF part of the process. If too many embryos implant or divide to save one or two they may [00:31:00] Recommend terminating, which I can't imagine after a woman has gone through infertility that she has to choose, um, which of her babies have should live or not.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: This is CD, c, data on the maternal and morbidity and mortality in the United States. So a RT increases risk factors for maternal mortality, I think most not notable. The ones highlighted in the red circles, maybe not as clearly, but I do think possibly increasing risks of those highlighted in gray, especially by increasing multiple gestations, and the risk of cardiomyopathy is definitely higher.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: pulmonary embolism, cerebral vascular accidents, especially with women with preeclampsia, which is definitely increased with with multiple gestations. Infant mortality, CDC 2020 report which is data from 2018 listed the five leading causes of infant death being [00:32:00] birth defects, preterm birth, and low birth rate, maternal pregnancy complications, sudden infant death syndrome, and injuries.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And the top three are also All complications of art. In an effort to reduce maternal morbidity and neonatal morbidity and mortality, it would be interesting to see a paradigm shift to treating underlying maternal issues while treating infertility. What about the long term risk to the carrier? There's evidence that IVF at a young age is associated with increased risk of breast cancer.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: There's no clear link to cancer found greater than age 24, so this could mean that egg donors are at increased risk. And are there enough studies to prove the safety of these treatments? I would argue perhaps not. The long term risks to the child, in addition to the risks of prematurity, decreasing oxidative stress, they talk about changing embryo cultures to improve success rates of IVF and ICSI, and the Cochrane database says that this results in more healthy newborns.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: They talk about changes to [00:33:00] the cultures and how that will create more healthy newborns. This does make me question what other factors may affect long term health, and this would be very hard to study. Long term. There are multiple studies demonstrating IVF and cancer risk in children.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: The study of a million children in Denmark did associate for an embryo transfer with an increased risk of childhood cancer. There's a few U. S. Studies In JAMA, this shows a rate of hepatic tumors are significantly higher in IVF conceived children, and this study demonstrates an increased risk of childhood cancer for what, for children in IVF especially those with, um, increase birth defects.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So the ICSI process is quite interesting. This is done for male factor. If they only have a few sperm, they're put in a petri dish. The embryologist waxes sperm on the tail, stuns it, and injects it into an egg. So ICSI increases the risk, is associated with [00:34:00] increased risk of congenital anomalies, endocrine abnormalities, and epigenetic imprinting effects.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I do think the cervical mucus does play a role in natural selection of healthier sperm, so I do theorize that this may be related to why this is, this occurs. There's also other unknown factors that are not studied. This IVF doctor, Dr. Schutt, on Instagram talked about even, her theory of unknown risk of radiation exposure to embryos in the lab and how they change their lights to help reduce radiation exposure since the woman's body actually Great.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: is protective against radiation in the environment to the embryo. So there is evidence that children conceived via IVF have increased risk of congenital anomalies or cancers. There are unknown long term risks behind beyond childhood when cancers and other medical issues arise, and there's an unknown effect on future generations.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: This data was difficult to find and understand, so it does make me question the ability for [00:35:00] patients to have a truly informed consent process if it was difficult for me to find this information. So is there a comparable alternative solution? So let's compare this to restorative reproductive medicine.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So I won't, I'll try to skim over this since I'm running out of time, but NaProTechnology is an alternative, and it is a way to optimize reproductive function. for in vivo conception. And so there are multiple factors we look into hormone deficiency, alludial phase defects, ovulation defects. We do look into mucus malfactor and various structural defects that may be corrected surgically.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And the stairs, here's a, the approach of kind of an algorithm of that we use if compared to the REI algorithm, this is an example of the alludial phase defect that we may be. may find this is an example of one of my patients with PCOS and mitreosis, and she had a type 2 luteal phase defect.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So we actually monitor the luteal phase and optimize that. All right, so get that ART bypasses the cervical [00:36:00] factor infertility via IVF or IUI. Alright, so the Naro study through surgical naro study here as to adhesion prevention studies I'm sorry, adhesion prevention measures. There's a great study by Dr.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Boyle comparing restorative reproductive medicine after failed IVF, which noted a 32% live birth rate for a older population of women. For example, over 40, the live birth rate was over was 27%. And they concluded that patients who have already tried IVF can achieve comparable live birth outcomes with restorative reproductive medicine compared to another cycle of IVF.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: They also found a low risk for twin or multiple births. They had very good neonatal outcomes and cost savings. Their twin rate was 1. 4 percent and had a low preterm birth rate. One of their patient population was very complex, many years of infertility, multiple failed IVF attempts, one of them up to nine failed [00:37:00] IVF attempts, and the average age of these women was 38.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And so in another study from Dr. Stanford compared this was in 2008, multi fetal pregnancies was 4. 6 percent and NaPro versus 20 percent with the UK database HEPA. There's another great study by Dr. Boyle in 2004, 95 couples who failed IVF and conceded with NaPro. And it's just interesting to see how many had unexplained infertility in their diagnosis through this, through restorative medicine or reproductive medicine and, but it did take longer.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: for them to conceive through restorative medicine. The benefits to restorative medicine, it can be used to identify and treat fertility issues before a woman is trying to conceive, so it can prevent infertility, it's lower cost. Less invasive. Addresses the underlying cause. They're less risk of short and long term adverse health issues.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It's reusable for future pregnancies. Lower risk of multi fetal pregnancies. Less ethical and legal issues in line with [00:38:00] all faith backgrounds. May aid in healthier pregnancies. So it may reduce maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. Providers are often still practicing obstetrics. And are inva involved in prenatal care.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So providers are more motivated to promote a healthier, lower risk pregnancy. NaPro, after an REI treatment of an unexplained infertility patient that I received. So she came to me, didn't know why she couldn't conceive and, wanted more of an explanation She did report some painful periods, and she did have a history of a C section, and she did have cyclical pain in her C section scar.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I did end up operating on her, and my unexplained infertility patient actually had a lot going on. She had stage 4 endometriosis, obstructed fallopian tubes And so you can see in these surgical pictures, the top right, doing a very difficult cannulation through the hystereoscopy doing the selective hysterosalpingogram through the hystereoscopy means that I could not get it with a [00:39:00] regular selective hysterosalpingogram.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So quite obstructed and you can see an Allen master's window in the bottom left picture, and her rectum stuck to the posterior uterus with blubs of endometriosis. And there's her rectum again stuck to her uterus. And this is after it was all taken down. She also had a second round of surgery. I was, I did not have the Gore Tex available that I typically use for advanced endometriosis cases.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So I did not have at that time so she did form adhesions on the left adnexa there. So she was a 37 year old G2P1. She had the diagnosis of unexplained fertility. When she came to me, they told her you know, you need to do IVF. And we found multiple things, stage 4 endometriosis, including an RC section scar, bilateral tubal occlusion, poor cervical mucus, type 2 allelial phase defect, thyroid dysfunction, low vitamin D, ovulation defect and a male factor.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: She went through a few rounds, a couple rounds of surgery with [00:40:00] me and treatment of ovulation defects. And she still has not conceived but that was a lot for someone who has supposedly had unexplained infertility. So this was at her last surgery here when we, when I put the took the adhesions down, put the Gore Tex in on the bottom picture and then took it out on the right.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So she had a nice outcome in the end of her pelvis. Here is the Gore Tex in the top left and you can see the pictures after it's taken out.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Yeah, that, yeah, I did talk about the for this woman, She did not so far achieve a pregnancy. However, she has been getting secondary benefits such as improving her symptoms and getting answers for her cause of infertility. And it's helped her with closure and emotional healing. So just a few success stories, which I'll go through quickly.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Patient number one, 40 year old G4P3 with amenorrhea. We weren't sure initially if this was lactational versus PCOS fibroid uterus, irregular cycles, second trimester loss in the past at 14 weeks. [00:41:00] Previous history of secondary infertility and had Clomid for three cycles in her last pregnancy.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: History of uop, plasma, history of leap, thyroid dysfunction, and a history of herpes. Upon her workup a MH was 0.17. FSH was up to 23. Her D-H-E-S-E-A-S was low and she was given DHEA protocol. For which there's some studies on for premature ovarian insufficiency or failure male factor, her husband couldn't get a, give a seminal fluid analysis.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: She did have a limited mucus and was put on mucus enhancers. Hypothyroidism was treated, vitamin D was optimized. She did undergo a surgery for myomectomy. Excision of endometriosis, left tubal cannulation, she had endometrial endocervical cultures and biopsies, and the picture didn't scan very well, but you can see her uterus in the middle there with the five centimeter fibroid to the top right.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: That's the fibroid zoomed [00:42:00] in. Endometriosis on the top, top two pictures and she apparently has very small ovaries due to her starting to go towards menopause. And on the bottom that's the myomectomy. This is her pelvis at the end of the procedure. It looks nice. It's hard to see.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And she was diagnosed with immature follicle syndrome. We tried various ovulation medications, Tamoxifen, Diclomid. She had multiple, then she had multiple, sorry, she had mature unruptured follicle syndrome. She started on triggers, we changed her trigger, and she finally did conceive on Tamoxifen, Menopur, and a Lupron trigger.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: She delivered at term. And actually I had to have a primary C section due to her large baby boy. Patient number two is a 32 year old, G2P1, history of miscarriage, history of cesarean delivery times one, secondary infertility for three years tail end brown bleeding. On her surgery, she was found to have endometriosis.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: She had bilateral obstructed fallopian tubes and [00:43:00] underwent excision of endometriosis and adhesion prevention measures. Treated for endometritis. You can see here again, her tubes were quite obstructed, so I did the selective hyster sonogram and tubal cannulation through the hysteroscope. This is her pelvis at the time of surgery.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: It's hard to tell, but she did have some endometriosis on the uterus. And that bottom left picture in her tubes are a little white from canalizing them. And she has endometriosis you can see in the top left picture with a defect in the peritoneum and you can see the clear endometriosis there. She underwent excision in these pictures here and pelvioplasty in the bottom right.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: More pictures here from her surgery. She was undergoing an ovulation series and actually had a, an ovulation defect where the follicle only reached 1. 8 centimeters and collapsed. We were going to put on ovulation mints, but she got pregnant the cycle after surgery during her ovulation series with an ovulation defect, but so far her pregnancy [00:44:00] is going well.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Patient three is a 30 year old G0, irregular cycles would bleed up to 13 days with talon bound bleeding of 5 days, had dysmenorrhea, many years of infertility. We were concerned for endometriosis insulin resistant PCOS elevated testosterone, and suspected a male factor. Sorry, she did have a male factor in varicocele, an elevated prolactin.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: She also reported PMS, heavy menses, difficulty identifying peak day a practitioner had recently started her on Mucinex. She had low vitamin D, and she conceived on Mucinex before we really even had much of the workup.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So to conclude to compare and contrast REI with RRM, here's a table on the, REI quick results versus RRM can take a long time. REI have limited tries. Versus restorative medicine. It's reusable for many cycles in future pregnancies. IVF is expensive. The short and long term costs are high.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Is a standard approach, it's quite simple [00:45:00] for the provider, versus restorative medicine does take extensive work for the provider. The REI is a little more straightforward for the patient they're told what to do each step of the way for restorative medicine. The patient does need to do a lot of work learning about her cycle and working cooperatively with us to treat her particular condition cooperatively with how her cycle is working.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: With REI, there's a high amount of unexplained infertility. And with restorative medicine, there are often many answers. I have yet to have an unexplained infertility patient. REI treatment, there are often very severe side effects. With REI, you tend to have a higher risk pregnancy, more poor outcomes, higher short and long term risks, extensive ethical issues.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: REI medicine is considered a standard of care and is well known to patients and providers alike. With RAI medicine, women have to wait until they're diagnosed with infertility to get treatment, and [00:46:00] RAI doctors tend to dismiss their patient back to a regular OB GYN around the second trimester.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Benefits of restorative medicine Lower risk of pregnancy in multiples. Patients heal in the process and feel better. There are fewer ethical issues. Unfortunately, it's not well known or advertised. It's also arguably not as lucrative for the provider. And you can use the treatment to prevent infertility in young women and Many restorative reproductive medicine providers do take care of patients throughout the entire pregnancy.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: All right.

IIRRM Host 2: Thank you, Dr. Whittaker. That was great. That was very informative. We could almost make that into two webinars. No, I didn't know when to stop. So is it, does anyone have any questions? You can put them for Dr. Whittaker or Welcome to put them in the chat. If you'd like to, if you think Dr.

IIRRM Host 2: Keenan, she says excellent talk. Thank you very much. I know we're reaching the hour, but maybe we [00:47:00] can take a few minutes for questions.

IIRRM Host 2: Very quiet group. We do have a session feedback and evaluation for CME. I've just put the link in the live chat. Oh, one question here from Mary Roman. What are your thoughts on getting the word out about RRM, as you mentioned? 

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Yes, yeah, that's a great question and a huge passion of mine. So my husband is in marketing.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: We have done a few things. NaProEbook. com is one PDF handout you can give to people. Making an account on Instagram is one way to do that. I have an account called NaPro Fertility Surgeon. And so I'm able to connect with fertility care practitioners to give them validity out there that there is science behind this.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: I think just You know, having more providers as many, physicians, nurses patients out on social media using the hashtag NaPro, Restorative Medicine, whatever we probably should get on the same page for hashtags But, connecting through social media and promoting each [00:48:00] other I think is a pretty easy way to do it.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: But yeah, I think there's a lot of work to be done with that. That's probably our biggest weakness is our marketing, I would say. 

IIRRM Host 2: And another question Maria Bezeki she's actually a pharmacist in Canada. She says she loves the NaPro ebook and she posts it to Facebook and her website.

IIRRM Host 2: Awesome. Thank you very much. 

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Always feedback is appreciated. We can always make things better, 

IIRRM Host 2: and then Caitlin Quaid she's asking If it is likely that poor egg quality due to advanced maternal age is the biggest contributing factor, to a person's infertility and how can RRM help? How can, sorry?

IIRRM Host 2: How can RRM help? I guess that you've seen. 

Naomi Whittaker, MD: Oh yeah. Really look to our naturopath partners. They have great ideas. So there's a book, it starts with the egg and collaborating with them but there are various supplement first lifestyle modifications, uh, certain supplements can help with egg quality like CoQ10 [00:49:00] alpha lipoic acid N acetylcysteine, L glutathione and, limiting alcohol, good sleep optimizing the gluteal phase, as well as I think what's important with restorative medicine and why I do believe the data clearly demonstrates that it is better for women over 40 because Restorative medicine only wants one egg versus IVF, they want to stimulate 10, 20 eggs.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And so if you try to retrieve You just really need one egg, right? But if you tried to retrieve 20 eggs from an older ovary more of them are going to be quite small and poor quality. And so it's harder to get a high volume good quality eggs from an older woman. And so the success is very low for women over 40, I think for that reason.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: And they're not really working on the health. Of the woman. Another thing that can help is like naltrexone as well. But yeah there's a full panel. DHEA can help, and that [00:50:00] is actually used there's some small case reports on DHEA being used for women with premature ovarian failure within one year of them stopping their periods, and they're trying to go through IVF, but it does improve outcomes.

Naomi Whittaker, MD: So I do apply that data to restorative medicine in that room. That really works well for some women that need it.

IIRRM Host 2: And yes, Dr. Stanford, of course, was talking touching on about Storm in the chat there. And he appreciate, obviously very appreciated your presentation and the balance you were able to get, bring in there. Yeah, and if you can see Dr. Stanford is commenting about RRM's hoping to be able to get a registry for RRM outcomes that we've been talking about while Storm going in the next little bit so yes.

IIRRM Host 2: Thank you, everybody, and thank you Dr. Whittaker for joining us and putting that presentation together. We do have our next webinar will be on June, [00:51:00] uh, and it is going to be from about FEM actually and clinical applications for the use of FEM and some case examples. Thank you and I guess have a great rest of your week and a long weekend for you, those of you that are in the US, 

IIRRM Host 2: Very 

IIRRM Host 2: much. Bye.

